the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit mitop courseware at
ocw.mit.edu all right good morning
everyone thanks for coming on quiz day I
have to have someone to throw frisbees
to you know Empty Chairs uh would be
difficult uh so we're going to be doing
dynamic programming a notion you've
learned uh in
66 we look at three different examples
today the first one is uh really at the
level of6 a cute little problem on
finding the longest palindromic sequence
um inside of a longer sequence sometimes
it's called longest palindromic
subsequence and uh as we'll talk about a
subsequence means that uh it can be
non-contiguous so you could uh you could
skip uh letters uh in a sequence of
letters uh and it it it would you would
still have a subsequence corresponding
to that don't have to be contiguous and
then uh we'll raise the stakes a little
bit so each of these uh problems uh gets
progressively more complicated more
sophisticated and you'll probably see uh
uh problems here at least alternating
coin game that are
beyond6 uh in the sense that it wasn't
covered those kinds of Notions weren't
covered
in6 so just in terms of review I wrote
this up here because I don't want to
spend a whole lot of time on it uh this
is something that uh you should have
some familiarity with uh by
I from the recitation for example that
you had on Friday and from dou six
dynamic programming is this wonderful
Hammer it's a an algorithmic technique
that you can use to solve problems that
you know look exponential in complexity
but if you can find this Optimum
substructure associated with the the
problem and its connection to its sub
problems and if you can characterize
that then you can do a recursive
decomposition of the problem where you
show that you can construct
the optimum solution from the sub
problems and that's really the the key
step really in dynamic programming is uh
step two you know once you've made this
characterization where you write this
recurrence out that relates the optimal
value of a bigger problem to the optimal
values of sub problems and um you
compute the value of the optimal
solution uh through uh a recursive memo
memorize or recursive
memorization and uh that memorization is
really what gives you the
efficient algorithm because you don't
repeat the solution of sub problems you
can also do this in an iterative fashion
essentially you're going to be Computing
things bottom up U you might want to
think about it as top down when you
write your recurrence But ultimately
when you actually execute the program
you'll be Computing things bottom up and
you'll be checking the memo table to see
if you've actually solved this problem
before and uh that would be the
recursive memoi case which in some sense
is a little bit easier to think about
and translates directly from the
recurrence uh but the other way to do it
is to do it iteratively and uh we'll
take a look for this first problem as to
how you would do the two different ways
um at least from a conceptual standpoint
uh even though I might not write out the
code of for each of those cases so a
couple of choices here recurs in memo wi
or um
essentially do it tively and the smaller
sub problems would have to get computed
first in both uh approaches uh the one
thing that uh sometimes we don't spend a
whole lot of time on is this last step
which is getting the exact solution so a
lot of the time you stop with saying I
can compute the value of the optim
Optimum solution the value of in terms
of the length of the longest pal
sequence is seven or nine but what is
that sequence or subsequence that
requires some additional coding some
additional uh accounting some uh uh the
construction of this optimal solution
typically requires some back tracing and
some uh information to
be keep kept track of during the
recursion memoized step or during the
iterative step right so that's something
to keep in mind you're not quite done
once you found the value of the optimum
solution and more often than not you
want the solution right so we'll talk
about that as well a little bit but
let's just dive in and uh look
at this cute little
problem of uh longest Palam dromic
sequence
and palindromes of course read the
same front to back or back to front
radar is a palindrome uh just as a
trivial example a single letter is a
palindrome U maybe I should have used u
a since that's actually a word uh but uh
you know here I got BB and that's not
definitely not a word um at least not a
word
that acronym maybe um rder is a
palindrome
able was I I saw Elba right that's a
palindrome and that's of course not a
single word but it's a famous palindrome
uh days of Napoleon uh but what we're
trying to do here is uh given that we
have uh this notion of a palindrome we'd
like to discover palindromes
inside longer words or longer sequences
so what we have is a
string and we'll call it
X1 through n n greater than or equal to
1 and we want to find the
longest
palindrome
that is a
subsequence and so here's an example to
get you guys warmed up we'll have a
couple of puzzles here in a
second so character
and you want to find the longest
palindrome and so you go I'll pick C
I'll skip H I'll pick a I'll pick R A
and C
and carak which I guess is not a word
either but uh it's uh it's the
longest palindrome that corresponds to a
subsequence of character right so uh the
game here as you can see is to pick the
letters
that I form the palindrome and drop the
ones that don't okay and we're going to
have to use dynamic programming uh to do
this uh the
answer will be greater than or one in
length because we've defined a single
letter as a palindrome right so it has
to be if you have one letter in the
input well you just pick that letter but
regardless of how many letters you have
on the input greater than equal to one
you know that you're going to get at
least a a onlet palindrome at the
output uh so here we
go let's say I have under and this is
thanks to Eric
here got a couple of nice words
underqualified
the person who gets me the longest
palindrome Vin of Frisbee and if you
want to code dynamic programming the
next two minutes and run it on your
laptops that's perfectly fine with me
that's not cheating okay so
underqualified
so U is a palr so we got that right so
one letter for
sure what else what's the longest
palindrome shout it out go go ahead
Shout It
Out Dei well that was quick deified
that's right
so um
right well defi to make is is to make
somebody u a a Dy so uh that was you
couple couple of you
guys uh do you have a frisbe yet all
right all right this is a little bit
more difficult I tried this on my on my
daughter yesterday so I know it's a
little more difficult
right
turbo ventilator
right we'll call that a
word right turbo ventilator right yell
it
out sorry rotor okay well that's five
can anybody beat that
Rotator so Rotator Rotator right so r o
t a t o r
Rotator all right
who is the
Rotator all right could you you already
have one I I want to throw this one
right um good practice with the quiz
guys good practice with the quiz no no
no these quiz jokes never go over well
you know I've been teaching for 27 years
and I still haven't learned that you
don't joke about
exams but I so nothing like this on the
quiz I don't want you studying the
thesaurus as opposed to the textbook for
the for the next few hours okay nothing
like this on the quiz all right um those
of you who are missing
python who loves 66 and python uh let's
let's talk about uh uh how you would
actually solve this using dynamic
programming uh and so what we want is Li
J which is the length
of the
longest palindromic uh
subsequence for XI
J and we're going to have I less than or
equal to
J so so that's essentially what we'd
like to uh compute and essentially when
I've set this
here I when I have Li J I have
decomposed the overall problem into sub
problems and it's kind of Fairly obvious
in this case because I'm going to have
to go in order right I mean that's the
constraint a subsequence does maintain
the ordering constraint it's not like I
can invert these letters right that
would be a different problem if I
allowed you to do that so um I'm going
to start somewhere and I'm going to end
somewhere and I want to have a non-null
subsequence so I'm going to have I less
than or equal to J I'm good with I being
equal to J because I still have one
letter and well that happens to be a
palindrome and it'll have a length of
one right so that's my li
J and what I want to do is uh Define a a
recursive
algorithm that computes Li right so U
we'll just try and figure out what the
recurrence looks like and then we can
talk about uh memorization or iteration
so
if I equals equals
J then I'm going to return one because I
know that that's a palindrome right by
default so that's
easy
and um what do you think the next check
should be if if I look at this x
sequence and I've have I as the starting
point in J as the next uh Point what do
you think the next check is going to be
once I have if I is not equal to
J uh sorry what was that again if x
IAL beautiful you're just checking to
see uh you're you're just checking to
see whether uh uh the two end points are
equal or not because if they're equal uh
then you can uh essentially uh grab
those letters and uh say that you're
going to be looking at a
smaller
subsequence that uh is going to uh get
you a palindrome and you're going to be
able to add these two letters that are
equal on either side of the computed
palindrome from the subsequence right so
if x of
I um equals equals x of
J then uh I'm going
to say if
I + 1al equal J I'm going to go ahead
and return
two because uh at that point I'm I'm
done there's no nothing else to do um
else I'm going to return
2+ L of I + 1 Jus one right so I'm going
to look inside and got these two letters
on either side that are equal so I can
always uh prepend to the palindrome I
got from here the letter and then a pen
the same letter and I got two plus
whatever value I got from this quantity
here all right so so so far uh it's uh
not really particularly interesting from
a standpoint of constructing the optimum
solution but this last line that we have
here where we have the case that the two
letters are not equal is the most
interesting line of code that's the most
interesting aspect of this algorithm
right so someone want to tell me what
this line is going to be out here yeah
go
ahead beautiful that's exactly right so
what you're going to do is you're going
to say I need to look at two different
sub problems and I need to evaluate both
of the sub
problems uh and the first sub problem is
I'm going to since these two letters are
different I'm going to have to drop one
of them okay and I'm going to look
inside I'm going to say I in this case
I'm going to drop the i letter and I'm
going to get l i + 1 J and in the second
case I'm going to drop the jth letter
and I'm going to get i j minus
one and that's it so it's a a Max and
there's nothing that's being added here
because those two letters one of them
had to get
dropped they weren't equal so one of
them had to get dropped so you're not
adding anything to this right so uh so
that's good and at this point you're
kind of done right
um whoops oh nice catch but you did drop
something uh all right so uh the the
thing that we've done here is gotten to
U step three right so just to be clear
we're not done done in terms of this
chart here because uh we don't have the
code there that corresponds
to actually
Computing uh the sequence right so it's
not that hard I'm I'm not going to go
over uh the code here I I'll you can
certainly U look at it in the notes uh
but uh you need a little bit of uh
tracing backwards in this uh recursion
to actually compute things what is the
complexity of what I wrote up there
though yeah s Theta n Square do people
agree that the complexity is Theta n
square or is this gentleman an
optimist is this is the complexity Theta
n Square tell me why the complexity is
Theta n Square because each sub problem
is that that code right there
absolutely but if you actually
implemented this code and you ran it and
N was a was a was 100 how long would you
wait for this code to
complete look at it what's
missing the cash exactly well you fixed
U your own little error there it was a
trick question okay so there's no
recursion I'm sorry there's recursion
here but no memorization right so this
is exponential complexity right you will
recur in fact the recurrence for that is
something like T of n equal 1 if n equal
1 and 2 T nus 1 if n greater than 1 and
this would be 2 to n minus1 in
complexity right now there's a single
line of code and you all know this that
would fix this right and that single
line of code is simply something that
says right
here
look at the LI J and I'm writing this
differently I'm I'm I I'm calling this
now a 2d array right so that's why I
have the Open brackets and closed
brackets so I'm overloading L here but
it's a 2d array that is going to
essentially be a cache for uh the sub
problem solution values okay and then if
you want to do the the back tracing to
actually compute the solution you can
certainly have that as an additional
record that's uh connected to this very
same value but that's uh implementation
and we won't really go there so look at
Li and don't
recurse if Li already computed
okay so that's important to remember
right now if you actually put that uh
the cache look up hash table look up
array look up what whatever you want to
call it out there then what you said is
exactly correct right so our um our uh
formula for computing the complexity of
a DP that you've seen a bunch of times
and I mentioned in the very first
lecture as well is number of sub
problems
times
time to
solve each sub
problem
assuming are
given that smaller
ones are solved or a look is order one
so look
up now you could say the hash table look
up is order one on average etc etc so um
what actually happens in the worst case
in this particular case and in most DPS
uh you can uh do things like uh perfect
hashing or something that's even simpler
in this case it's just a 2d array
there's not going to be any collisions
if you just use I andj as the indices to
the array so you will definitely get a
an order one look up uh in in this case
and most problems we look at uh in 046
so if you just do that computation which
uh my friend over here just described
you do get your Theta n Square because
you have Theta n Square sub problems and
uh um
uh time to solve each sub problem
given that the smaller ones are solved
um is uh is is simply going to be a
computation of a of a Max and an
addition right so all of that is is
Theta one right because you're not
counting the recursive calls okay so uh
this is our first example I'm I'm uh
done with it uh any questions about it
any questions about DP in
general all right good uh so little bit
of review there
uh not a particularly complicated
question uh let's uh go to a different
question corresponding to Optimal binary
search trees it's a very different
question I I don't think I need this
anymore and it's kind of cute in its own
way one of the things that's interesting
about this question
is is it seems like a greedy algorithm
should work and we'll talk about that in
as to why the greedy algorithm you know
doesn't quite work so it's kind of
similar to the interval scheduling and
the weighted interval scheduling problem
that we had back in February where the
regular interval scheduling problem
greedy worked earliest finish time
worked uh but when it came to weights we
had to
graduate um to dynamic programming so um
here's our second problem optimal bsts
right so what is an optimal
bstd um we have a bunch of
keys that we want to store in the BST K1
through KNN and um we'll assume that the
way this is set up is that K1 is less
than K2 da d da less than KNN and just
to make our life easier in our examples
I we'll just assume that Ki equals
I um that's not necessarily required for
anything we're going to do next is just
for the sake of examples and keeping
things
manageable so I got a bunch of keys and
clearly there are many different binary
search trees that uh can come uh whether
they're balanced or unbalanced many
different binary search trees can be
consistent with uh a given set of keys
right if I choose the root to be uh KNN
then I'm going to get this horribly
unbalanced tree right if I chose the
root to be somewhere in the middle then
I'm going to get something that looks a
little better at least at the top level
but again if I messed it up at the next
level I'd get something that's
unbalanced right so there's clearly many
different bsts uh I'm not talking about
balanced bsts here but we're going to
Define an optimality Criterion that's a
little bit different from balanced bsts
because it's going to have this
additional cost function associated with
it that corresponds to the weight of the
keys okay so what is that well I'm going
to have
weights um associated with each of these
Keys corresponding to W1 through WN and
um the easiest way to uh motivate
you to think that um these weights are
an interesting addition to this problem
is to think about these weights as being
search probabilities so what you have
for argument sake is a is a static
structure that you've created uh and I
mean you could modify it there's nothing
that stopping you from doing that but
let's just pretend for now that it's a
static structure corresponding to this
BST has a particular structure and um
chances are you're going to be searching
for some keys more frequently than
others and the wi tell you what the
probabilities are in terms of searching
for a particular key Ki right so you can
imagine and we won't have this here that
uh you take the wi all sum up to one if
you want to think of them as
probabilities or you can just I'm just
going to give you numbers I don't want
to deal with fractions no don't
particularly like fractions uh so uh you
can imagine that each probability
corresponds to a wi divided by the sum
of all of the wi if you want all of the
probabilities to sum up to one okay but
so think of them as search probabilities
because then you'll see what the point
of this exercise is uh and the point of
this exercise is to
find the BST T so we're actually
constructing a binary search Tre here so
it's a little more interesting than than
a subsequence for example it has a
richer structure associated with it
there are an exponential number of
possible binary search trees that are
associated with a given set of n keys
that are all you know binary searches
they're consistent unbalanced balanced
you know unbalanced in one way versus
another way etc etc
so we want to find a binary sech stre T
that uh
minimizes um
Sigma I = 1 through n obviously we're
going to have this wi that's the the
game here uh
depth uh in the T So this depth is for
the T what is the depth of the node um
and K of I + one
okay um and I'll explain exactly what
this is and I tell you what precisely
the depth is uh but roughly speaking uh
the depth of the root not roughly
speaking the depth of the root is zero
okay uh and uh the the depth of one
below the root is one and so on and so
forth um and so as you can see what you
want to do is collect uh in roughly
speaking you want to collect the high
weight nodes to have L depth right if wi
is high you want the the multiplicative
Factor corresponding to depth T of that
node I the I node to be to be small and
if wi is small then you don't mind the
depth uh number to be higher uh you only
have a certain number of a low depth
nodes you only have one node of depth
zero and you have two nodes of depth uh
uh one which means that you only have
one node where that quantity there is
going to be one right because you're
doing 0 plus one and you have two nodes
where the quantity is going to be two um
and so on and so forth so you have some
room here to play with corresponding to
the BST structure and you want to
minimize that quantity okay um any
questions so
far all right good um so uh the search
probabilities would be an example so I
in terms of a more concrete application
you could imagine you had a a
dictionary English to French French to
English what have you and um there're
obviously words that are more common
let's say in uh uh common speech than
others and you do want to do the
translation uh in a dynamic way using
this data structure and you could
imagine that in this case the uh the
search probability of a word is
associated with the uh occurrence of the
word the uh the number of times uh over
some normalized uh uh number of words
that this particular word occurs and
that would be the that would be the
weight so it makes sense to create a
structure that minimizes that function
because it would minimize the expected
search cost when you want to take this
entire uh essay for example and and
convert it from English to French or
vice versa okay so this can if if these
are search probabilities then this would
minimize this cost function here would
minimize
expected search
cost right
um make
sense okay so uh that's the definition
of the problem um and uh now we have to
talk about um why this is complicated
why uh this uh requires uh dynamic
programming uh why can't we um just do
something fairly straightforward uh like
a like a grey
algorithm and so let's look into
that let me give you a really good sense
for what's going on here with respect to
this cost function that may be a little
abstract by giving you a couple of
concrete examples uh first off we got
exponentially many trees
exponential in
N let's say that n equals 2 so the
number of nodes is two then remember
that I'm assuming that the kis Are all
uh eyes that's the one and two would be
uh the K is for uh Nal 2 and 1 2 3 for
uh K Nal 3 Etc so I could have a tree
that looks like that and I could have a
tree that looks like this that's it um n
equals 2 I got two trees right so in
this case my cost function is W1 + 2
W2 and in this case my cost function is
2 W1 + W2 okay um just to be
clear um what this is is the
uh is is um the K right and it's also
the I so the numbers that you see inside
those are the I numbers which happen to
be equal to the Ki numbers okay and the
weight itself would be the wi so I put
W1 here and the reason it only gets
multiplied by one is because the depth
here is zero and I add one to it the
depth here is one and I add one to it
which is why I have a two out here okay
um being a little uh
pedantic here and pointing things out
because you're going to start seeing
some equations that are a little more
complicated than this and I don't want
you to get confused as to what the
weight is and what the key number is and
what the depth is there's three things
going on here okay so over here you see
that um I got I'm looking at W1 here
which is this key right so the the one
corresponds to the one and and this has
a depth of one so I put a two in here
and so on okay so so far so good um
when you get to n equals 3 uh you you
start getting well you have you have at
this point you have u 1 2 3 4 five you
got five
trees uh and uh the trees look like
this I'll draw them really quickly just
to get a sense of the variety here but I
won't write the equations down for um
all of them
there you go so those are the the five
binary trees associated with n equals 3
right the binary search trees um and U
this is this is kind of cool uh it's
nice and balanced you know the other
ones aren't um and I'm not I'm not uh um
looking at U or do should I should I
have another one here I guess I should
have
this is a oh no no so I'm not doing
mirrors uh and so so there is there are
a bunch of other trees that have the
same equation associated with two no
that's that's not true because uh these
are it I I I was going to say that you
could put three in here but that would
be a binary search tree right so this
this is it uh and we got a bunch of
trees this this one would be uh 2 W1 +
W2 + 2 W3
by the same process that I used to show
you the W1 + 2 W2 for the N equals 2
case you just go off and that's the
equation and so your goal here in an
algorithm clearly this is not the
algorithm you want to enumerate all the
exponentially many trees compute the
equations for each of those trees and
pick the minimum right I mean that would
work but it would take exponential time
right so uh so but that's what you have
to do now that's the the goal you
absolutely want the best possible tree
that has for the given wi that you're
going to be assigned as constants you do
want to find the one uh uh threee that
has the minimum sum uh and you want to
do that for arbitary n and you want to
do that in polinomial time okay so uh
the first thing that you do when you
have something like this
is f about the fact that uh we're in a
dynamic programming lecture or a dynamic
programming module of this class when
you see a problem like this so in the
real world uh you want to think about
whether a greedy algorithm would work or
not um and uh you don't want to go off
and build this Dynamic program solution
uh which is chances are going to be in
more in more uh uh inefficient than a
greedy solution which if it produces the
optimum answer um is the best way to go
so um an obvious greedy solution would
be to pick K of R in
some greedy
fashion and what is the obvious way of
picking K of R uh to try and get a
greedy solution that at least attempts
to minimize that cost function that we
have there high highest weight right so
just pick K of R to be highest weight
because that goes back to what I said
about if wi is high you
want uh this value here to be small
right so that's essentially your greedy
heuristic so K of R should be picked in
a in a greedy fashion so what you do is
you pick K of r as the root in this
particular problem and you could
certainly apply this greedy technique
recursively okay so you do that for
every sub problem that you find because
when you do this choice of the the root
for KR in the current problem that you
have you immediately split the keys into
two sets right the sets that have to go
on the left hand side of KR and the sets
that have to go on the right hand side
of KR right so in this case you know
that you're going to have uh a a bunch
of keys here that correspond to
KI to
KR and over here um you're going to have
or KR minus one I should say because you
already have KR out there and the keys
here are going to be KR + one to uh KJ
if
overall uh I'm going to say that um e
j um
is the
cost of the
optimal
BST on Ki
k i +
um all the
way to
KJ okay so um I'm kind of already
setting myself up here for uh dynamic
programming but it also makes sense in
the case of a of a greedy algorithm
where this greedy heuristic is going to
be applied recursively okay so initially
you're going to have uh
e1n right so if you want to compute
e1n which is the cost of the optimal BST
on the original problem all right all
the way from one to n you're going to
look at it and you're going to say uh I
have a bunch of keys here of a different
weights that correspond to K1 through
KNN I'm going to pick the KR that
corresponds to the maximum weight and
I'm going to use that as the root node
and I'm going to stick that up there and
uh the reason I did that uh is because
I'm I believe that this greedy heuristic
is going to work where this maximum
weight node should have the the absolute
minimum depth okay so I stick that up
there and then my BST invariant tells me
that Ki through KR minus1 remember these
are sorted right and they go uh in
increasing order as I have up here uh
you're going to have those on the left
and you have going to have those on the
right and then you got to go solve this
problem and you can certainly apply the
greedy heuristic to solve this problem
right you could go essentially uh find
the K uh that uh has the highest weight
so you look at wi through w r minus one
and you find the the K that has the
highest weight right so you're not going
Midway here it's quite possible that KR
is K of n okay it just happens to be KR
is K of n so so that means that uh uh
you have the highest weight node up here
but it's also the the biggest key so all
of the nodes are going to be on the left
so this greedy heuristic and now you're
starting to see maybe there's a problem
here because uh if you have a situation
where uh the the highest weight node is
also the largest node you're going to
get a pretty unbalanced tree okay so I
can tell you that greedy doesn't work
and U uh when I gave this lecture I
think it was a couple of years ago I I
made that statement and U uh this uh uh
annoying student asked me for an example
okay and I couldn't come up with one and
so I kind of bailed on it went on uh
completely dissatisfied of course and by
the end of uh the lecture uh the same
student came up with a counter example
right so I'm going to have to put that
up here
and uh thank the student who sent me
a email about
it and so here's a concrete example it
turns out I was trying to get a three-
Noe example for a few minutes and uh
fail it it's it's it's uh I think
impossible I haven't proved this to to
find a three Noe example with arbitrary
weights for which the greedy algorithm
fails
okay but four nodes it fails okay so
that's the good news um so
here's here's the
example thanks to Nick
Davis and it looks like this
oops so I claim that the greedy
algorithm for the problem that is given
to me uh would
produce this uh BST right and uh the
reason reason for that uh is simple uh
the highest weight node happens to be
node two which has a weight of 10 so I
would pick that and I'd stick that up
here which means of course that I'm
going to have to have one on this side
and I'm going to have to have four and
three on the other side and since four
has a higher weight uh than three I'd
pick that first and then three would
have to go over here okay so if I go do
the math um the cost is going to be 1 *
2 and I'll explain what these numbers
are I did tell you it was going to get a
little uh cluttered here with uh with
lots of numbers but if you keep that
equation in mind then this should all
work out um so what do I have here um
I'm just Computing this is
W1 so you you see the first numbers in
each of these are the are the weights uh
and so this would be W2 and Etc and you
can see that this is at
depth one which means I have to have two
here because I'm adding one to the depth
so I have 1 * 2 10 * 1 because that's at
the root 9 * 2 Etc and um I get I get 54
right it turns out the optimum tree you
can do you can do better than that if
you pick
three um and you
go like this
and so what you have here is the cost =
1 * 3 + 10 * 2 + 8 * 1 + 9 * 2 and
that's
okay so I'll let you look at that um the
bottom line is I it because of the way
the weights are set up here uh you
really want to use the top three
spots uh for which have the the minimum
depth uh for the highest weight nodes
right and so you can see that I could
make this uh these weights uh arbitrary
obviously and I could break a greedy
algorithm as this little example shows
right so we got no recurse here we got
to do some more work we're going to have
to use DP to solve this problem the good
news is DP does solve this problem
okay um so let Let's uh let's take a
look at the decomposition and as with
anything else uh the key is uh the the
step that corresponds to breaking up the
original problem into two parts uh or
more uh that that essentially give you
this sort of decomposition and uh we
don't quite know so this is really the
key question here we don't quite know
what the root node is going to be so
what is what do we do when we don't know
what to do
do right what do we do in DP when we
don't know what to do this is a very
profound
question what do you do you guess and
not only do you guess you guess all
outcomes you you you say is it going to
come up heads is it going to come up
Tails I'll guess both you have a die
it's going to get roll a one 2 3 four 5
six guess them all right so if you're
going to have to guess that the root
node could be any of the any of the keys
right and it's still I mean there's
there's a linear number of guesses there
that's the good news it's going to stay
polinomial time okay so we're going to
have to guess and once you do that guess
it turns out that decomposition that you
see up there um is exactly what we want
it's just that the greedy algorithm
didn't bother with all of these
different guesses and the DP is
different from the greedy algorithm
because um it's going to do each of
those guesses and he going to pick the
best one
that comes out of all of those guesses
right so it's really not that different
from greedy right so um we'll keep that
up there I leave that here let's go over
here so the recursion here is not going
to be that uh hard once you have gotten
the inside that you just have to go make
a linear number of guesses corresponding
to the root node for your particular sub
problem and obviously this happens
recursively
okay so there's a little subtlety here
that I'll point out with respect to
writing these equations out right so
what I have here just to be clear is
what I wrote up there even when I was
talking about the greedy algorithm I uh
had the sub problems defined so the
original problem is E1 through n uh the
sub problems correspond to uh e
j and given a sub problem once I make a
root choice I get two sub problems that
result from the root Choice okay and
each of those two sub problems is going
to be something and this is something to
keep in mind as we write these equations
out they're going to be one level below
the root okay so keep in mind that the
original e j sub problem corresponded to
this level uh but the e i r minus one
problem uh and the e r + one J problem
are at one level below okay so keep that
in mind as we write these equations
out um and so uh what I want to do here
is just write the recurrence and after
that Things become fairly mechanical the
fun is in the recurrence right so I got
wi if I equals
J right so I'm at this level and uh if I
just have one node left then um at that
level uh I'm going to pay uh the the
weight associated with that node uh and
I'm going to have to do a certain amount
of um um of of multiplication here with
respect to the depth but I'm just
talking about EIG as the sub problem
weight just focusing in on that problem
so if I only have one node it's the root
node and that weight is going to be wi
because the root node has depth of zero
and I'm going to add one to it right so
for that sub problem I got I got wi all
right keep that in mind because that's
the only subtlety here with respect to
these equations making sure that our
actual cost function that we're
Computing has the correct uh depth uh
multipli cant associated with it okay so
um then we have our linear guessing um
and uh oh I I I might have said Max at
some point uh we want to get the the the
min here and I had min minimize here so
I think I'd wrote things down correct
but at some point I think I might have
said we want to maximize cost uh uh but
we do want to minimize cost here
corresponding to the uh the search
expected search so we're doing a linear
and uh we're doing a A Min and we're
going to go off and uh look at each of
the different uh nodes as being the root
just like we discussed okay um and what
I'm going to do here is I'm going to
Simply say first that I'm going to look
at e r minus one which corresponds to
this um and I'm going
to uh
have plus e of r + 1 comma
J okay and I at this
point I
I don't quite have what I want because I
haven't actually taken into account the
fact that uh the the depth of the EI
rus1 and the r+1 J is one more than the
eii J right so it's it's one more than
that right and I also haven't taken into
account the fact that in this case um I
definitely need to add a wi as well
right because I the root node is part of
my solution in both cases in one case it
ended my solution uh the top case but in
this case it's also the root node as you
can see over on the left and I got to
add that in there so I definitely need
to add a wi here okay and what else do I
need to
add uh from a from from a standpoint of
the weights what other weights do I need
to add uh to uh to this line yeah go
ahead first of all should be
R uh first of all that should be a WR
you're exactly correct you want add and
you want to add all the weights right uh
and uh you're exactly right um I have
two more frisbees but I need to use them
for something else okay so you get one
next time right or um do I have more
than
that no no I these are precious frisbees
here you know sorry man you
know um so and you you corrected me too
sh you know shoot this is this is sad um
uh so that needed to be a WRR okay uh
but you also need to add all of the
nodes that are in here because there one
one more level right and now you see why
I made the mistake right I don't usually
make
mistakes but what I really want actually
it's more like you know I don't know a
few per lecture you know constant order
one
mistakes right and I'm going to say this
is W comma J all right where wi comma J
is simply the sum of all of the weights
from I to J okay
so and this makes perfect sense because
the nice thing is that I don't even need
to put an r in there all right so it's
uh I I could choose I put particular R
WR R will be in there but all of the
other nodes are going to be in there
anyway right so it doesn't really matter
what the r selection is corresponding to
this term here though I will put it
inside the uh the the the minimization
uh this bracket here is closed with that
but you can pull that out because that
doesn't depend on R right it's it's just
going to be there uh uh for all of the
cases all of the guesses all right so
that's it that's uh that's our
recurrence relationship corresponding to
uh the DP for this particular
problem um you can go figure out what
the complexity is and I I have other
things to do so we'll move on uh but you
can do the same things and these are
fairly mechanical at this point to go
write code for it trace the solution to
get the optimum binary search Tre uh y y
y right uh any questions about this
equation or anything else do people get
that yeah go ahead what is the depth so
um the depth is getting added by the
weights um so basically what's happening
is that um as I go deeper into the
recursion I'm adding the weights and
potentially multiple times depending on
the depth right so if you really think
about it this wi
J added all of these weights but when
you go into this recursion into the EI
of Rus one well you're going to see I to
Rus one in the next level of recursion
so you would have added you know the
weight again right so it's not the case
that the weights are only appearing once
they're in fact appearing this many
times right so that's what's kind of
cute about this right the way the way we
wrote it
okay uh any other
questions all right good so uh we're
done with that so one last example um
this is again a little bit different uh
from uh the examples of DP we've looked
at up until now because it's it's a game
and you have an opponent and U you have
to figure out what the opponent is going
to do uh and you know try to try to
win uh I guess you suppose you could try
to lose as well but um let's assume here
same thing with minimization and
maximization uh most of the time you can
U invert these cost functions and DP
will still work but let's assume here
that you want to win this game right so
uh so the game is an alternating coins
game
where we have a row of n
coins um of
values
V1 through VN um these are not
necessarily in any particular order uh
it and N is
even and um uh the goal here is uh
select the outer coins so uh select uh
either the
first or
last
coin uh from the
row and then the uh opponent Place
remove permanently but add it to your
value and receive the value
all right so I need two
volunteers to play this game and uh you
want to maximize the value the winner
gets a blue
frisbee the loser gets a purple frisbee
because blue is greater than
purple and and you might ask why is that
well if you went to a
beach and you saw water this color you
went to another Beach and you saw water
this color which beach would you pick
right this is cuml this is Boston Harbor
right right so blue is greater than
purple right don't use this proof
technique in the quiz all right so do I
have a couple of volunteers to play this
game two of them over there or are you
were waving for him yeah I I see one you
can come down another
volunteer right y over there right all
right you don't get your fris PES yet so
um we going to make this really fair
right uh what's your name Josiah Josiah
Tessa Tessa Josiah uh and Tessa I'm
going to write out uh a bunch of it's
going to be
a a fairly short game
okay and we're going to be really fair
and we're going to flip a coin to decide
whether Josiah goes first you can pick
heads or tails uh and or whether Tesla
goes first and you can actually if you
win you can let her go first if you want
but you get to choose all right so pick
heads that's heads all right do you want
to go first or do you want to let Tessa
go
first you should go
first all right so um Tessa you get to
go first okay um six six okay so uh
let's just say uh t Okay uh so you get
to choose uh either 25 or four Josiah
well I think I take 25 you think you'll
take 25 okay so that's J all right so
it's it's now down to four and 19 over
here because those are gone so you're
turn again okay um can I take a minute
or should I just uh well you can take
you can take uh 30 seconds okay
right 19 19 okay
all right PA
four all
right and 42 all right 42 this is one
strange game all right all right now we
get to add up the numbers this is going
to be tight right 4 + 39 is 43 43 + 25
is
68 um 42 + 19 is uh 61 61 + 6 is
67 oo all right well you get frisbees
right all right well uh blue for you
right I mean you can give her blue if
you like yeah you prefer purple right
thanks okay good job
um no offenses intended to Josiah and
Tessa but that was a classic example of
how not to play the game okay first off
Josiah could have won uh regardless of
the coins that were up there regardless
of the values of the coins if he chosen
to go first right so this game the
person who goes first is guaranteed to
not lose and by that I mean you uh uh
may have a situation where you can have
a tie in terms of the values but you're
guaranteed to not lose all right so now
he ended up winning anyway because there
were other errors
made uh in in in during this and I don't
have the time to enumerate all of them
okay so we're just going to go move on
and uh do the right thing all
right so
so let me first tell you outside of DP
just in case you play this game over
spring break or
something how you can uh win this game
uh without having to compute you know
complicated recursive memorization DP
programs right for this case Okay so
let's say I have V1 V2 V3 all the way to
VN minus one and VN and remember n is
even
right so you got to Pick n n/2 coins uh
if you're the first player and n/ two if
you're the second
player um so what the what the first
player
does um is simply
compute V1 take the odd numbers and uh n
is even so you got VN minus1 being odd
compute V1 + V3 all the way to VN minus
one and compare
that with uh the even positions V2 plus
V4 all the way to VN so in this
particular instance
um uh Josiah who went second uh uh but
if you just if you just look at the odd
positions which is in fact what he ended
up picking it was 4 + 39 plus 25 which
was 68 and so you can do this
computation beforehand you compute this
to be 68 in our case compare that with
um
67 okay and uh you don't give up your
your uh your first player Advantage so
you're going with the first player but
now you say I know that I can set this
up and that wasn't the order that he did
this but I know I can set this up so I I
always have a chance to get V1 V3 V5 Etc
because let's just say that uh uh the
first player Josiah started first and he
decided in this case that the odd values
are the ones that win right so you'll
pick he he pick let's say he picks V1 uh
at this point Tessa sees V2 through VN
right so he's just looking at to that
now Tessa could either pick V2 or she
could pick VN in that case uh jiia who's
the first player could pick V3 or VN
minus one and stick with his rule of
picking the odd coins all right so
regardless of what Tessa does I the
first
player jessiah could pick odd if odd was
the way to go or if the values were such
that even were were the way to go he
could go even okay so no reason for the
first player to lose uh but uh let's
just say that um you're a nasty person
right Michael Jordan
nasty you want to just crush your
opponent you you want to make sure they
never want to play you again okay so now
you have a a a a maximization problem
right so this is clearly not DP you
don't need DP to add up a bunch of
numbers uh but let's say that you want
to given a set of coins V1 through uh VN
uh you want a strategy a dynamic
strategy that U uh gives you the maximum
value right um this odd versus even is a
bit constraining because you're stuck to
these positions and it's good to be uh
in that situation if you just want to
win and you don't care how you win right
but if you want to maximize then it's a
more complicated problem right and so we
have to talk about how you would do uh
something that would uh give maybe it
would be V1 and V4 and something else
depends on the values how would you get
to a situation if you're the first
player we just stick with you're the
first player you know you can't lose
using this strategy but not only do you
want to not lose you want to get as many
coins as possible let's say this is
money you know more money is better uh
and uh that's your goal okay so uh so
people understand that a little
U little trick there with a I guess a
greedy algorithm you can you can think
of
or it's not really a even something that
you might want to call an algorithm
little
computation and our goal now is to
maximize the amount of
money when
assuming you move
first and so this is going to be a
little bit different uh from all of the
other problems we looked at because we
have to now think about what the
opponent would do right and there's
going to be a sequence of moves here
right you're going to move first so that
one is easy you got the whole problem uh
but now you have to say um the opponent
is going to move uh and pick a coin and
then you have to think of your sub
problems as the potential uh rows of
coins that are going to be different
depending on what the opponent does
right and through this process you have
to maximize the value right so it's a
it's really pretty different from the
other couple of examples that uh that we
looked
at um so we're going to have to do a
little bit of setup before we get to the
point where we can write something like
this which is uh the solution to our to
our DP and so let me do that set up but
it's not super complicated and part of
this is going to look kind of the same
as previous problems we've looked at um
so VI J is the max value
we
can definitely
win
if it is our
turn and only
coins VI through VJ I
remain
okay and so we have VI I
then there's only one coin
left and you just pick
I right now uh you need this you might
say well but that's never going to
happen uh if there's an even number of
coins and I'm playing first uh because
the other uh player is going to be at
the end of the the the the is going to
be the person who picks the last coin
but we need to characterize VII is
because we need to model what the other
players going to do right so we can't
just say that we're going to be looking
at even number of coins in terms of the
row of coins that uh you you look at
which is true that when you get to move
you only see an even number of coins if
you're the first player but you do have
to model what the opponent does so we
need the VII
okay um and what you you might see of
course uh is a board that looks like VI
I +
one uh and I mean it might um
be for some arbitrary eye right so
that's why I have it up there but
remember that you're only picking coins
on the outside so it's not like you're
going to have a gap Ian you're not going
to have V3 left and V7 left right
there's no way that's going to happen
you're just going to keep shrinking
taking things from the left or the right
right so it's going to be I and I + one
right that Mak sense um and so in this
case what would you pick VI and I +
one you just pick the max right because
that end of this either you did it right
or you did it wrong either way you're
going to improve your situation by
picking the max of VI or VI + 1 right so
there's no two things about it so here
you're going to
pick the
maximum of the
two um and you might have U VI i+ plus
two which is an an odd number of coins
that um that your opponent might see uh
it gets more complicated uh for Vi and
i+ 2 we're going to have to uh now start
thinking in more general terms as to
what the different moves are right but
we got the base cases here all I did
here was take care of the base case or a
couple of Base cases associated with um
a single coin which is what your
opponent will see and pick or two coins
which is your last move
okay so with all with DP of course you
always have to go down to your base case
right and that's when things become
easy um so let's talk about we have to
talk about two things and put U our
recurrence
together the two things we have to talk
about are what you do when you
move um and that's actually fairly easy
and the second thing is what uh the
model of the opponent looks like uh when
uh you're waiting for um uh him or her
to move so let's take a look at your
move and I got
V1 let's look at
VI let say VJ here dot do dot VN right
so that's the the what you see uh and
you're looking at I and
J and at this point you're you're seeing
all those other coins the outer coins
have disappeared
uh into people's pockets uh and you're
looking at this uh
interval so I'm going to write out what
VI should be and keep in mind that we
want to um uh maximize the amount of
money and we want to say that we should
be able to definitely win this amount of
money right regardless of what the
opponent
does so um I want to do a a Max
obviously
and um I have two choices here I can
pick VI or I can pick VJ right so it's
not like there's a lot of choices here
right so if I pick VI uh then let me go
ahead and say I pick VI
here and here I'd pick
VJ and uh whoops let me draw this a
little bit
better so I got to fill in uh these two
uh uh arguments
to to my
Max right so um this is
easy I'm going to have a plus VI here
going to have a plus VJ
here right so because I picked the
appropriate value um and um now this is
also not that uh difficult uh what
exactly happens what can I put in
here if I pick
VI yeah VI + one to J so the range
becomes
uh I + 1 J so I got uh uh I I have to be
a little careful here in terms of uh uh
whether um I can argue that it's
actually the V that I put in here so the
subtlety here is simply that uh uh that
the the
vi + one J is not something that I see
in front of me
okay this is the complication VI + 1j is
never a board that I see in front of me
whereas VI was a board that I saw in
front of me right so I have to model uh
the the boards that I see in front of me
because those are the boards that I have
control over that I can maximize right I
the the I need I cannot put vij vi+ 1j
in there simply because I I don't quite
know what that is because I what I get
eventually is not something I control
right it's going to be the the the board
after my opponent has moved all right so
all I'm going to do is I'm going to say
the
range um
becomes range
is um I + 1
J um and I'm going to say something else
in a second here the range is uh
i j minus
one okay and in both of these
cases the opponent
moves so in order to actually write out
my DP I'm going to have to now U look at
the worst case
situation in terms of the board I get
back because the only times I'm adding
values is when I see a board in front of
me and pick a coin and I'm going to have
to say now the opponent is going to see
an i + 1
J and or or an i minus one i j minus one
excuse me and might do something and I'm
going to get something back let's assume
that I I'm going to assume that the
opponent is just as smart as I am knows
DP taking 6046 etc etc and uh I still
want to get the maximum value that I can
definitely win okay um and so uh we need
to look inside of that a little bit and
it's not that hard if you just make the
assumption that I just did which is uh
the opponent um is going
to uh I mean might not necessarily do
the right thing but you have to assume
that uh the opponent knows it just as
much as you do and is going to try and
um uh uh do as well as possible okay so
uh let's do that that's the last thing
that we have to do here and uh it's just
one uh more equation so so here's the
solution we now have a v i + 1 J sub
problem with the opponent
picking
and um the simple observation is that we
are
guaranteed the
men of v i + 1 Jus
1 or v i + 2
J in this
case um the opponent
picks VJ and in this case the opponent
picks VI +
1 right and you're you're guaranteed the
minimum of these two because the
opponent can only pick one coin right so
that's the the simple observation that
lets you jump
ahead uh to your next move which is
really what uh the DP is interested in
uh because uh that's the only time that
you're actually executing something in
terms of picking coins from the board
and adding to your value right but we
did did have to model that as to what uh
the maximum value was that you could win
uh jumping ahead of this move and you
have have the the Min here because
you're assuming that uh this is a
definite guarantee right that's what we
want uh it's possible that uh the
opponent plays uh um a different game
from uh the one that um we think he or
she is going to play which maximizes his
or her value but the men is a guarantee
okay so now that you've made this
observation uh it turns out we just have
to take that and uh uh we we we'll we'll
be done right so let's see uh let me
erase this so
last set of
equations and it's just plugging in that
observation into what I wrote
before so we have V
J equals Max this is the outer Max that
I had up there already so that's the
same
Max um and put this giant brackets here
and inside I I'm going to plug in this
this
minim uh which is something that
corresponds to the the the value that I
would win in the worst case after the
opponent plays the best possible move
and that would be VI I +
1 Jus
one
uh
comma we I + 2 J plus VI this VI is the
same as this one up
here um and you got a plus VJ here and I
didn't actually do this but in terms of
writing out what the opponent would do
in the other sub problem case but it's
really pretty straightforward uh you um
have a problem that corresponds to uh
the i j minus one problem and the
opponent could pick the I or could pick
the J minus one if the opponent picks
the J minus one you get um v i j minus 2
and you need to take the Min of that and
the other case where the opponent picks
I in which case you get I + 1 J minus
one
okay and that's our DP that's that's R
DP okay so the big difference here was
the modeling that you had to do in the
middle we didn't actually have to do
that in any of the DPS we've
covered uh in 046 at least uh up until
this point um before we talk about
complexity I that should just take a
minute people buy that see that good so
uh with all of these problems the
complexities are fairly straightforward
to compute I the complexity here is
simply again as before the number of sub
problems times the time it it it takes
to solve a sub problem uh you can see
here that these are all constant time
operations so assuming that the the the
the vs have been computed it's Theta one
time to compute a sub problem so that's
your Theta 1 and U as before there
are N squ Sub problems uh sorry let's
just do number of sub
problems times Theta 1 which is Theta n
squ
all right so that was good all right so
uh good luck for the quiz uh and um
don't worry too much about it uh see you
guys next week